the giant tortoise arguably the most
recognizable animal in Galapagos
[Music]
it even gave the islands their name
Galapagos means tortoise in old Spanish
[Music]
biologist Steve Blake has been studying
the epic journeys these giant tortoises
make basically tortoises follow where
the good food is and the greenness of
the vegetation depends on the elevation
so as seasonal swings in rainfall kick
in through the Galapagus year the
tortoises follow that sort of pendulum
of greenness as it moves up and down the
island but these seasonal migrations
have been affected by the arrival of
humans puerto ayora the largest town in
Galapagos were settled in 1925 as a
small fishing village since then in the
space of just one tortoise generation
the population has exploded to over
12,000 people
Steve wants to discover what impact this
is having on the ancient tortoise roots
he's been fitting them with satellite
tags to follow their movements
we have about 30 old tortoises wearing
GPS tags on Santa Cruz and those tags
each one records a GPS fix of the
tortoise every hour
Steve's tagging reveals the huge
distances tortoises travel to find food
some migrate from sea level to the peaks
of volcanoes
[Music]
but now Steve's also discovering that
the ever increasing human population
here is having a major impact on these
well-worn paths 100 years ago this giant
tortoise behind us was already migrating
up and down Galapagos but in completely
natural vegetation today that same
tortoise encounters very different
conditions up here fences roads and
other barriers that potentially block
that migration it's not just the future
of giant tortoises that's at stake
these reptiles play a vital role in the
whole ecosystem here
they've been called the Gardeners of
Columbus as they plow through the
vegetation they spread seeds and clear
plants creating light and space for new
ones
we even stir up insects for birds to eat
without these migration routes allowing
giant tortoises to find the food they
need these islands would look very
different identifying and mapping these
important routes will help to inform
future expansion plans
[Music]
the trick will be how to sustain the
migration give tortoises what they need
against the backdrop of development of
Galapagos
you